# Metering and RMS

\

You need the right tools for the job, and when it comes to music creation the most important tools are your meters.  They come on many different forms but they all help you make better sounding music.  Like any tool it is important to know exactly how to use and what information is it desplaying.

In order to understand metering in general, the key concept is that the Peak level of any section of audio has nothing to do with how loud that audio is.  For example, a piece of audio containing recorded and un-proccessed drums may have a very high Peak level and a relatively low volume.  Conversely, a vocal recording could have the same Peak level as the drums, but will often be much louder.  This is because the audio level of the drums will rise and fall quickly.  Your ears percieve volume as more of an average of the sound pressure over time, so signals that stay at a given level for longer will sound louder.

A Peak meter like the ones that you find on every channel of most DAWs are useful for monitoring if the audio will clip.  Digital audio has a maximum volume that can be represented in binary, and at that point the audio will be clipped.  So a Peak meter is very useful for seeing if you have reached that point, since Peak is the loudest point in the audio.
However, when it you are making music you constantly are whanting to know just how loud an instrument, bus, or mix is and that is what RMS is used for.

As I mentioned, your ear interprets volume as an average over time, and that is what RMS is.  So RMS is a measurement of how lound a signal is.  It is not an exact match for how your ear averages volume but it is close enought to be very useful when creating and mixing music so it has become the standard.

Below I made an RMS meter and an FFT spectrum analyser.  You can pick an audio file and play it to see the RMS and frequency content.  The smoothing slider changes the amount of time that is taken into account when doing the averaging and the FFT Depth selector gives higher resolution for the frequency analyser, at the cost of processing time.